docs/DECISIONS.md, before:

# Technical Design Decisions

This document explains key technical choices made in the HARV system, including empirical justifications where applicable.

---

## Model Selection: MobileNetV3 on CPU

### Decision
Use **MobileNetV3-Small** as the default model for CPU-based training and inference.

### Rationale

**Requirements:**
- CPU-only training (no GPU dependency for graders/reviewers)
- Fast inference (<100ms on CPU)
- Small model size (<20MB for quick deployment)
- Sufficient accuracy for face recognition (≥85% on validation)

**Alternatives Considered:**
1. **ResNet18**: Classic CNN, proven architecture
2. **EfficientNet-B0**: State-of-art efficiency
3. **MobileNetV3-Small**: Mobile-optimized architecture

### Empirical Comparison

Benchmarked on synthetic dataset (100 train, 20 val images, 2 classes, 3 epochs):

| Model | Params (M) | Size (MB) | Train Time/Epoch (CPU) | Val Accuracy | Inference (CPU) | Memory (RSS) |
|-------|------------|-----------|------------------------|--------------|-----------------|--------------|
| **MobileNetV3-Small** | 2.5 | 14.2 | 45s | 0.889 | 12ms | 380MB |
| EfficientNet-B0 | 5.3 | 21.4 | 78s | 0.901 | 23ms | 520MB |
| ResNet18 | 11.7 | 46.8 | 62s | 0.895 | 18ms | 650MB |

**Benchmarked on real face dataset (500 train, 100 val images, 2 classes, 3 epochs):**

| Model | Train Time/Epoch (CPU) | Val Accuracy | Inference (CPU) | Memory (RSS) |
|-------|------------------------|--------------|-----------------|--------------|
| **MobileNetV3-Small** | 3m 12s | 0.872 | 15ms | 420MB |
| EfficientNet-B0 | 6m 45s | 0.891 | 28ms | 580MB |
| ResNet18 | 4m 38s | 0.865 | 22ms | 720MB |

### Conclusion

**Winner: MobileNetV3-Small**

**Strengths:**
- ✅ **Fastest training** (45s vs 62-78s per epoch on synthetic; 3m12s vs 4m38s-6m45s on real data)
- ✅ **Fastest inference** (12-15ms vs 18-28ms)
- ✅ **Smallest size** (14.2MB vs 21-47MB) - critical for Cloud Run cold starts
- ✅ **Lowest memory** (380-420MB vs 520-720MB)
- ✅ **Good accuracy** (87-89% validation accuracy)

**Trade-offs:**
- ⚠️ Slightly lower accuracy than EfficientNet-B0 (1-2% difference)
- ⚠️ Less feature capacity for very large datasets (>10k images)

**When to use alternatives:**
- **EfficientNet-B0**: GPU available + need highest accuracy
- **ResNet18**: Need standard architecture for research comparison

### Configuration

Default (`params.yaml`):
```yaml
model_name: mobilenet_v3_small
epochs: 3
batch_size: 16
lr: 0.0005
freeze_ratio: 0.7  # Freeze 70% of layers for transfer learning
```

For EfficientNet-B0:
```yaml
model_name: efficientnet_b0
epochs: 5  # Needs more epochs to converge
batch_size: 8  # Reduce batch size (more memory-intensive)
lr: 0.0003
freeze_ratio: 0.8
```

---

## Transfer Learning Strategy

### Decision
Use **ImageNet pretrained weights** with **70% layer freezing** and fine-tune only the classifier and top layers.

### Rationale

**Why Transfer Learning:**
- Small dataset (100-1000 images per class)
- Limited training time (CPU-only)
- Face recognition shares low-level features with ImageNet (edges, textures)

**Freezing Ratio Experiments:**

| Freeze Ratio | Trainable Params | Train Time/Epoch | Val Accuracy | Overfitting Risk |
|--------------|------------------|------------------|--------------|------------------|
| 0.0 (none) | 2.5M | 52s | 0.923 | ⚠️ High (train=0.98, val=0.92) |
| 0.5 (50%) | 1.2M | 48s | 0.901 | Medium |
| **0.7 (70%)** | **0.6M** | **45s** | **0.889** | ✅ Low (train=0.91, val=0.89) |
| 0.9 (90%) | 0.2M | 43s | 0.834 | ⚠️ Underfitting |

**Conclusion**: 70% freezing provides best balance between training speed, accuracy, and generalization.

---

## Data Augmentation: Blur Simulation

### Decision
Apply **5-level Gaussian blur augmentation** (σ = 0.0, 0.5, 1.0, 1.5, 2.0) to simulate distance effects.

### Rationale

**Problem**: Students may be at varying distances from camera (1-10 meters), causing blur/resolution degradation.

**Solution**: Augment training data with blur levels corresponding to distances.

**Blur Level Mapping:**
- σ=0.0: No blur (close-up, 0-1m)
- σ=0.5: Slight blur (1-2m)
- σ=1.0: Moderate blur (3-5m)
- σ=1.5: Heavy blur (6-8m)
- σ=2.0: Extreme blur (>8m)

**Impact on Performance:**

| Augmentation | Val Accuracy (Clean) | Val Accuracy (Blurred Test) | Robustness |
|--------------|----------------------|-----------------------------|------------|
| None | 0.923 | 0.651 | ❌ Poor |
| 3 levels | 0.901 | 0.812 | ⚠️ Medium |
| **5 levels** | **0.889** | **0.867** | ✅ Good |
| 7 levels | 0.871 | 0.873 | ⚠️ Diminishing returns |

**Conclusion**: 5 levels provide best trade-off between clean accuracy (0.889) and blur robustness (0.867).

---

## Geolocation Provider Selection

### Decision
Support **multiple providers** (Google, ip-api, Mock) with **auto-selection** based on API key availability.

### Rationale

**Requirements:**
- Work without API keys (for quick testing)
- Support high-accuracy option (for production)
- Enable offline development

**Provider Comparison:**

| Provider | Accuracy | Rate Limit | Cost | Setup |
|----------|----------|------------|------|-------|
| **Google Geolocation API** | 20-100m | Pay-per-use | $5/1000 requests | Requires API key |
| **ip-api.com** | 500-2000m | 45 req/min (free) | Free | No key required |
| **Mock** | N/A | Unlimited | Free | Built-in (Harvard coords) |

**Auto-Selection Logic:**
```python
if GEO_PROVIDER == "auto":
    if GOOGLE_API_KEY:
        use_google()
    else:
        use_ipapi()
```

**Why This Design:**
- ✅ Works out-of-box (ip-api free tier)
- ✅ Upgradable to high-accuracy (Google API)
- ✅ Testable offline (Mock provider)
- ✅ No vendor lock-in

### Configuration Recommendations

**Development/Testing:**
```bash
GEO_PROVIDER=mock
GEO_EPSILON_M=100
```

**Production (Campus WiFi):**
```bash
GEO_PROVIDER=ipapi  # or auto
GEO_EPSILON_M=60    # WiFi typically 50-100m accuracy
```

**Production (GPS Override):**
```bash
GEO_PROVIDER=google
GEO_EPSILON_M=30    # GPS typically 10-50m accuracy
GOOGLE_API_KEY=your_key_here
```

### Epsilon Tuning

**Recommended Values:**

| Scenario | Epsilon (m) | Rationale |
|----------|-------------|-----------|
| GPS-based | 20-30 | GPS accuracy: 5-15m |
| WiFi (Google API) | 40-60 | Google WiFi accuracy: 20-100m |
| WiFi (ip-api) | 80-120 | ip-api accuracy: 500-2000m (wide net) |
| Cellular | 100-200 | Cell tower accuracy: 100-1000m |

**Trade-offs:**
- **Tight epsilon (20-30m)**: High security, may exclude legitimate users at edge of room
- **Loose epsilon (100-200m)**: High convenience, may allow nearby buildings

**Recommendation**: Start with 60m for campus WiFi, tune based on false positive/negative rates.

---

## Face Detection: OpenCV Haar Cascades

### Decision
Use **OpenCV Haar Cascade classifier** for face detection in preprocessing.

### Alternatives Considered
1. **MediaPipe Face Mesh**: High accuracy but slower (50ms/image)
2. **MTCNN**: Better accuracy but PyTorch dependency (adds 30MB)
3. **Haar Cascades**: Fast (5ms/image), lightweight, built into OpenCV

### Benchmarked Performance

| Method | Detection Time | Accuracy (Frontal) | Accuracy (Angled) | Size |
|--------|----------------|--------------------|--------------------|------|
| **Haar Cascade** | 5ms | 96% | 78% | Built-in |
| MTCNN | 45ms | 98% | 92% | +30MB |
| MediaPipe | 50ms | 99% | 95% | +15MB |

**Conclusion**: Haar Cascades sufficient for controlled classroom environment (frontal faces). Can upgrade to MediaPipe for Milestone 3 liveness detection.

---

## Hyperparameter Choices

### Learning Rate: 0.0005

**Experiments:**

| LR | Convergence | Final Accuracy | Stability |
|----|-------------|----------------|-----------|
| 0.001 | Fast (2 epochs) | 0.871 | ⚠️ Unstable (oscillations) |
| **0.0005** | **Medium (3 epochs)** | **0.889** | ✅ Stable |
| 0.0001 | Slow (6+ epochs) | 0.893 | ✅ Stable but slow |

**Conclusion**: 0.0005 provides good convergence speed without instability.

### Batch Size: 16

**Experiments (CPU, MobileNetV3-Small):**

| Batch Size | Memory | Time/Epoch | Val Accuracy |
|------------|--------|------------|--------------|
| 4 | 280MB | 68s | 0.876 |
| 8 | 340MB | 52s | 0.882 |
| **16** | **420MB** | **45s** | **0.889** |
| 32 | 580MB | 43s | 0.891 |

**Conclusion**: 16 is optimal for CPU (8GB RAM). Use 8 for low-memory systems, 32 for GPU.

### Epochs: 3

**Validation Curve:**

| Epoch | Train Loss | Train Acc | Val Loss | Val Acc |
|-------|------------|-----------|----------|---------|
| 1 | 0.652 | 0.724 | 0.432 | 0.852 |
| 2 | 0.401 | 0.865 | 0.389 | 0.870 |
| **3** | **0.321** | **0.892** | **0.367** | **0.889** |
| 4 | 0.276 | 0.912 | 0.371 | 0.887 |
| 5 | 0.243 | 0.923 | 0.389 | 0.881 |

**Conclusion**: Model converges by epoch 3. Beyond this, validation accuracy plateaus or decreases (overfitting). Early stopping at patience=5 prevents further overfitting.

---

## Image Size: 224×224

### Decision
Use **224×224** as standard input size (ImageNet convention).

### Trade-offs

| Size | Params | Memory | Train Time | Accuracy |
|------|--------|--------|------------|----------|
| 112×112 | 2.3M | 280MB | 32s | 0.834 |
| 160×160 | 2.4M | 340MB | 38s | 0.867 |
| **224×224** | **2.5M** | **420MB** | **45s** | **0.889** |
| 320×320 | 2.6M | 620MB | 72s | 0.894 |

**Conclusion**: 224×224 is standard for ImageNet models, provides good accuracy, and is well-supported by pretrained weights.

---

## Why Not GPU?

### Decision
**CPU-only** training and inference for Milestone 2.

### Rationale

**Grader/Reviewer Considerations:**
- ✅ No CUDA/GPU drivers required
- ✅ Works on any laptop (Mac, Linux, Windows)
- ✅ Reproducible results (no GPU vendor differences)
- ✅ Simpler Docker setup (no nvidia-docker)

**Performance Impact:**
- CPU training: 3-10 minutes (acceptable for demo)
- GPU training: 30-90 seconds (unnecessary optimization at this stage)

**Future Work (Milestone 3+):**
- Add optional GPU support via `device` parameter
- Maintain CPU path as default for accessibility

---

## Data Split: 70/15/15

### Decision
**70% train, 15% validation, 15% test** split.

### Rationale

**Standard Practices:**
- 60/20/20: More test data, less training data
- **70/15/15**: Balanced approach
- 80/10/10: More training data, less validation

**For Small Datasets (500-1000 images):**
- Need sufficient training data (≥350 images)
- Need meaningful validation set (≥75 images) for early stopping
- Need representative test set (≥75 images) for unbiased evaluation

**Conclusion**: 70/15/15 provides best balance for datasets in the 500-2000 image range.

---

## Summary of Key Choices

| Decision | Choice | Main Reason |
|----------|--------|-------------|
| **Model** | MobileNetV3-Small | Fastest CPU training/inference (3x faster than alternatives) |
| **Pretrained** | ImageNet weights | Small dataset (<1000 images) benefits from transfer learning |
| **Freeze Ratio** | 70% | Best accuracy/overfitting balance |
| **Augmentation** | 5-level blur | Robustness to distance (close-up to 8+ meters) |
| **Geo Provider** | Auto (Google > ipapi) | Works out-of-box, upgradable |
| **Face Detector** | Haar Cascade | Fast (5ms), sufficient for frontal faces |
| **Learning Rate** | 0.0005 | Stable convergence in 3 epochs |
| **Batch Size** | 16 | Optimal CPU memory/speed trade-off |
| **Epochs** | 3 | Convergence point, early stopping prevents overfitting |
| **Image Size** | 224×224 | ImageNet standard, good accuracy |
| **Device** | CPU-only | Grader accessibility, reproducibility |
| **Split** | 70/15/15 | Balanced for small datasets |

---

## Future Optimizations (Out of Scope for MS2)

1. **GPU Support**: Add CUDA option for 10-20x training speedup
2. **Quantization**: INT8 quantization for 4x inference speedup (TorchScript → ONNX → TFLite)
3. **Pruning**: Remove 30-50% of weights with <1% accuracy loss
4. **Ensemble**: Combine MobileNetV3 + EfficientNet for +2% accuracy
5. **AutoAugment**: Learn optimal augmentation policy
6. **Knowledge Distillation**: Distill larger model → MobileNetV3 for best of both worlds

---

## Library & Framework Choices

### PyTorch vs TensorFlow

**Decision**: Use **PyTorch** as the primary ML framework.

**Rationale**:
- ✅ Better transfer learning support (torchvision pretrained models)
- ✅ More intuitive API for research and prototyping
- ✅ TorchScript export for production deployment
- ✅ Strong community support and documentation
- ✅ Native integration with OpenCV and PIL

**Alternatives Considered**:
- **TensorFlow/Keras**: More production-oriented but heavier dependencies
- **ONNX**: Cross-framework but adds complexity for this use case

### FastAPI vs Flask

**Decision**: Use **FastAPI** for the inference API.

**Rationale**:
- ✅ Automatic OpenAPI documentation
- ✅ Built-in async support for concurrent requests
- ✅ Type validation with Pydantic
- ✅ Better performance than Flask (3-5x faster)
- ✅ Modern Python 3.11+ features

### Docker Compose vs Kubernetes

**Decision**: Use **Docker Compose** for local orchestration, with Cloud Run for production.

**Rationale**:
- ✅ Simpler setup for reviewers/graders
- ✅ No cluster management overhead
- ✅ Sufficient for development and testing
- ✅ Easy migration to Kubernetes in future (Milestone 3+)

**When to Use Kubernetes**:
- Production at scale (>100 requests/sec)
- Multi-region deployment
- Advanced autoscaling needs

---

## Trade-offs Considered

Below is a comprehensive summary of alternatives tested or rejected during development:

| Decision Area | Chosen Solution | Alternatives Tested | Why Rejected | Trade-off Accepted |
|---------------|-----------------|---------------------|--------------|-------------------|
| **Model Architecture** | MobileNetV3-Small | ResNet18, EfficientNet-B0, ViT-Tiny | Slower inference (18-28ms vs 12ms) | -1.5% accuracy for 2x speed |
| **Transfer Learning** | 70% freeze ratio | 0%, 50%, 90% freeze | 0%: overfitting; 90%: underfitting | Slight accuracy loss for better generalization |
| **Image Augmentation** | 5-level blur | None, 3-level, 7-level | None: poor blur robustness; 7: diminishing returns | -3% clean accuracy for +20% blur robustness |
| **Face Detection** | Haar Cascade | MediaPipe, MTCNN, RetinaFace | 5-10x slower, larger dependencies | Lower accuracy on angled faces (78% vs 95%) |
| **Geolocation Provider** | Multi-provider (auto) | Google-only, ip-api-only | Vendor lock-in, no offline testing | Complexity of multiple providers |
| **Learning Rate** | 0.0005 | 0.001, 0.0001 | 0.001: unstable; 0.0001: too slow | Moderate convergence speed |
| **Batch Size** | 16 | 4, 8, 32 | 4/8: slower; 32: minimal gain | Memory usage (420MB) |
| **Epochs** | 3 with early stopping | 1, 5, 10 | 1: underfit; 5+: overfit | Quick training for CPU |
| **Image Size** | 224×224 | 112×112, 160×160, 320×320 | Smaller: -5% accuracy; Larger: 2x slower | Standard ImageNet size |
| **Device** | CPU-only | GPU (CUDA) | Requires GPU drivers, not accessible to all graders | 5-10x slower training (acceptable for demo) |
| **Data Split** | 70/15/15 | 60/20/20, 80/10/10 | 60/20/20: less training data; 80/10/10: small val set | Balanced for small datasets |
| **Framework** | PyTorch | TensorFlow, JAX | TensorFlow: heavier; JAX: less mature ecosystem | PyTorch's flexibility |
| **API Framework** | FastAPI | Flask, Django | Flask: slower; Django: overkill | FastAPI learning curve |
| **Orchestration** | Docker Compose | Kubernetes, Docker Swarm | Too complex for local dev | No auto-scaling (use Cloud Run) |
| **Blur Simulation** | Gaussian blur (σ) | Motion blur, defocus blur | Less realistic for distance simulation | Simple distance model |
| **Liveness Detection** | Challenge word | Blink detection, head movement | Requires MediaPipe (future work) | Lower security (Milestone 2) |

### Key Insights from Trade-offs

1. **Speed vs Accuracy**: Consistently chose speed (MobileNetV3, Haar Cascade) over marginal accuracy gains
2. **Simplicity vs Features**: Prioritized grader accessibility (CPU-only, Docker Compose) over advanced features
3. **Robustness vs Performance**: Accepted blur augmentation overhead for real-world robustness
4. **Flexibility vs Simplicity**: Multi-provider geolocation adds complexity but prevents vendor lock-in

---

## Decision Principles

Throughout the project, we followed these principles:

1. **Grader-First**: Every technical choice considers ease of setup and reproducibility
2. **CPU Optimization**: No GPU dependencies, optimized for 8GB RAM laptops
3. **Production-Ready**: Choices support deployment (Cloud Run, TorchScript, FastAPI)
4. **Extensibility**: Architecture allows future enhancements (GPU, Kubernetes, MediaPipe)
5. **Evidence-Based**: All major decisions backed by empirical benchmarks

---

## References

1. [MobileNetV3 Paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/1905.02244) - Howard et al., 2019
2. [EfficientNet Paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/1905.11946) - Tan & Le, 2019
3. [ImageNet Pretrained Models](https://pytorch.org/vision/stable/models.html) - PyTorch Documentation
4. [Transfer Learning Guide](https://cs231n.github.io/transfer-learning/) - Stanford CS231n
5. [Haversine Formula](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Haversine_formula) - Wikipedia
6. [FastAPI Documentation](https://fastapi.tiangolo.com/) - Performance benchmarks
7. [PyTorch vs TensorFlow](https://www.assemblyai.com/blog/pytorch-vs-tensorflow-in-2023/) - Framework comparison

Commit message:

removed mentions of word of the day, changed face recognition to lecture hall recognition

docs/DECISIONS.md, after:

# Technical Design Decisions

This document explains key technical choices made in the HARV system, including empirical justifications where applicable.

---

## Model Selection: MobileNetV3 on CPU

### Decision
Use **MobileNetV3-Small** as the default model for CPU-based training and inference.

### Rationale

**Requirements:**
- CPU-only training (no GPU dependency for graders/reviewers)
- Fast inference (<100ms on CPU)
- Small model size (<20MB for quick deployment)
- Sufficient accuracy for lecture hall recognition (≥85% on validation)

**Alternatives Considered:**
1. **ResNet18**: Classic CNN, proven architecture
2. **EfficientNet-B0**: State-of-art efficiency
3. **MobileNetV3-Small**: Mobile-optimized architecture

### Empirical Comparison

Benchmarked on synthetic dataset (100 train, 20 val images, 2 classes, 3 epochs):

| Model | Params (M) | Size (MB) | Train Time/Epoch (CPU) | Val Accuracy | Inference (CPU) | Memory (RSS) |
|-------|------------|-----------|------------------------|--------------|-----------------|--------------|
| **MobileNetV3-Small** | 2.5 | 14.2 | 45s | 0.889 | 12ms | 380MB |
| EfficientNet-B0 | 5.3 | 21.4 | 78s | 0.901 | 23ms | 520MB |
| ResNet18 | 11.7 | 46.8 | 62s | 0.895 | 18ms | 650MB |

**Benchmarked on real face dataset (500 train, 100 val images, 2 classes, 3 epochs):**

| Model | Train Time/Epoch (CPU) | Val Accuracy | Inference (CPU) | Memory (RSS) |
|-------|------------------------|--------------|-----------------|--------------|
| **MobileNetV3-Small** | 3m 12s | 0.872 | 15ms | 420MB |
| EfficientNet-B0 | 6m 45s | 0.891 | 28ms | 580MB |
| ResNet18 | 4m 38s | 0.865 | 22ms | 720MB |

### Conclusion

**Winner: MobileNetV3-Small**

**Strengths:**
- ✅ **Fastest training** (45s vs 62-78s per epoch on synthetic; 3m12s vs 4m38s-6m45s on real data)
- ✅ **Fastest inference** (12-15ms vs 18-28ms)
- ✅ **Smallest size** (14.2MB vs 21-47MB) - critical for Cloud Run cold starts
- ✅ **Lowest memory** (380-420MB vs 520-720MB)
- ✅ **Good accuracy** (87-89% validation accuracy)

**Trade-offs:**
- ⚠️ Slightly lower accuracy than EfficientNet-B0 (1-2% difference)
- ⚠️ Less feature capacity for very large datasets (>10k images)

**When to use alternatives:**
- **EfficientNet-B0**: GPU available + need highest accuracy
- **ResNet18**: Need standard architecture for research comparison

### Configuration

Default (`params.yaml`):
```yaml
model_name: mobilenet_v3_small
epochs: 3
batch_size: 16
lr: 0.0005
freeze_ratio: 0.7  # Freeze 70% of layers for transfer learning
```

For EfficientNet-B0:
```yaml
model_name: efficientnet_b0
epochs: 5  # Needs more epochs to converge
batch_size: 8  # Reduce batch size (more memory-intensive)
lr: 0.0003
freeze_ratio: 0.8
```

---

## Transfer Learning Strategy

### Decision
Use **ImageNet pretrained weights** with **70% layer freezing** and fine-tune only the classifier and top layers.

### Rationale

**Why Transfer Learning:**
- Small dataset (100-1000 images per class)
- Limited training time (CPU-only)
- Lecture hall recognition shares low-level features with ImageNet (edges, textures)

**Freezing Ratio Experiments:**

| Freeze Ratio | Trainable Params | Train Time/Epoch | Val Accuracy | Overfitting Risk |
|--------------|------------------|------------------|--------------|------------------|
| 0.0 (none) | 2.5M | 52s | 0.923 | ⚠️ High (train=0.98, val=0.92) |
| 0.5 (50%) | 1.2M | 48s | 0.901 | Medium |
| **0.7 (70%)** | **0.6M** | **45s** | **0.889** | ✅ Low (train=0.91, val=0.89) |
| 0.9 (90%) | 0.2M | 43s | 0.834 | ⚠️ Underfitting |

**Conclusion**: 70% freezing provides best balance between training speed, accuracy, and generalization.

---

## Data Augmentation: Blur Simulation

### Decision
Apply **5-level Gaussian blur augmentation** (σ = 0.0, 0.5, 1.0, 1.5, 2.0) to simulate distance effects.

### Rationale

**Problem**: Students may be at varying distances from camera (1-10 meters), causing blur/resolution degradation.

**Solution**: Augment training data with blur levels corresponding to distances.

**Blur Level Mapping:**
- σ=0.0: No blur (close-up, 0-1m)
- σ=0.5: Slight blur (1-2m)
- σ=1.0: Moderate blur (3-5m)
- σ=1.5: Heavy blur (6-8m)
- σ=2.0: Extreme blur (>8m)

**Impact on Performance:**

| Augmentation | Val Accuracy (Clean) | Val Accuracy (Blurred Test) | Robustness |
|--------------|----------------------|-----------------------------|------------|
| None | 0.923 | 0.651 | ❌ Poor |
| 3 levels | 0.901 | 0.812 | ⚠️ Medium |
| **5 levels** | **0.889** | **0.867** | ✅ Good |
| 7 levels | 0.871 | 0.873 | ⚠️ Diminishing returns |

**Conclusion**: 5 levels provide best trade-off between clean accuracy (0.889) and blur robustness (0.867).

---

## Geolocation Provider Selection

### Decision
Support **multiple providers** (Google, ip-api, Mock) with **auto-selection** based on API key availability.

### Rationale

**Requirements:**
- Work without API keys (for quick testing)
- Support high-accuracy option (for production)
- Enable offline development

**Provider Comparison:**

| Provider | Accuracy | Rate Limit | Cost | Setup |
|----------|----------|------------|------|-------|
| **Google Geolocation API** | 20-100m | Pay-per-use | $5/1000 requests | Requires API key |
| **ip-api.com** | 500-2000m | 45 req/min (free) | Free | No key required |
| **Mock** | N/A | Unlimited | Free | Built-in (Harvard coords) |

**Auto-Selection Logic:**
```python
if GEO_PROVIDER == "auto":
    if GOOGLE_API_KEY:
        use_google()
    else:
        use_ipapi()
```

**Why This Design:**
- ✅ Works out-of-box (ip-api free tier)
- ✅ Upgradable to high-accuracy (Google API)
- ✅ Testable offline (Mock provider)
- ✅ No vendor lock-in

### Configuration Recommendations

**Development/Testing:**
```bash
GEO_PROVIDER=mock
GEO_EPSILON_M=100
```

**Production (Campus WiFi):**
```bash
GEO_PROVIDER=ipapi  # or auto
GEO_EPSILON_M=60    # WiFi typically 50-100m accuracy
```

**Production (GPS Override):**
```bash
GEO_PROVIDER=google
GEO_EPSILON_M=30    # GPS typically 10-50m accuracy
GOOGLE_API_KEY=your_key_here
```

### Epsilon Tuning

**Recommended Values:**

| Scenario | Epsilon (m) | Rationale |
|----------|-------------|-----------|
| GPS-based | 20-30 | GPS accuracy: 5-15m |
| WiFi (Google API) | 40-60 | Google WiFi accuracy: 20-100m |
| WiFi (ip-api) | 80-120 | ip-api accuracy: 500-2000m (wide net) |
| Cellular | 100-200 | Cell tower accuracy: 100-1000m |

**Trade-offs:**
- **Tight epsilon (20-30m)**: High security, may exclude legitimate users at edge of room
- **Loose epsilon (100-200m)**: High convenience, may allow nearby buildings

**Recommendation**: Start with 60m for campus WiFi, tune based on false positive/negative rates.

---

## Face Detection: OpenCV Haar Cascades

### Decision
Use **OpenCV Haar Cascade classifier** for face detection in preprocessing.

### Alternatives Considered
1. **MediaPipe Face Mesh**: High accuracy but slower (50ms/image)
2. **MTCNN**: Better accuracy but PyTorch dependency (adds 30MB)
3. **Haar Cascades**: Fast (5ms/image), lightweight, built into OpenCV

### Benchmarked Performance

| Method | Detection Time | Accuracy (Frontal) | Accuracy (Angled) | Size |
|--------|----------------|--------------------|--------------------|------|
| **Haar Cascade** | 5ms | 96% | 78% | Built-in |
| MTCNN | 45ms | 98% | 92% | +30MB |
| MediaPipe | 50ms | 99% | 95% | +15MB |

**Conclusion**: Haar Cascades sufficient for controlled classroom environment (frontal faces). Can upgrade to MediaPipe for Milestone 3 for enhanced detection.

---

## Hyperparameter Choices

### Learning Rate: 0.0005

**Experiments:**

| LR | Convergence | Final Accuracy | Stability |
|----|-------------|----------------|-----------|
| 0.001 | Fast (2 epochs) | 0.871 | ⚠️ Unstable (oscillations) |
| **0.0005** | **Medium (3 epochs)** | **0.889** | ✅ Stable |
| 0.0001 | Slow (6+ epochs) | 0.893 | ✅ Stable but slow |

**Conclusion**: 0.0005 provides good convergence speed without instability.

### Batch Size: 16

**Experiments (CPU, MobileNetV3-Small):**

| Batch Size | Memory | Time/Epoch | Val Accuracy |
|------------|--------|------------|--------------|
| 4 | 280MB | 68s | 0.876 |
| 8 | 340MB | 52s | 0.882 |
| **16** | **420MB** | **45s** | **0.889** |
| 32 | 580MB | 43s | 0.891 |

**Conclusion**: 16 is optimal for CPU (8GB RAM). Use 8 for low-memory systems, 32 for GPU.

### Epochs: 3

**Validation Curve:**

| Epoch | Train Loss | Train Acc | Val Loss | Val Acc |
|-------|------------|-----------|----------|---------|
| 1 | 0.652 | 0.724 | 0.432 | 0.852 |
| 2 | 0.401 | 0.865 | 0.389 | 0.870 |
| **3** | **0.321** | **0.892** | **0.367** | **0.889** |
| 4 | 0.276 | 0.912 | 0.371 | 0.887 |
| 5 | 0.243 | 0.923 | 0.389 | 0.881 |

**Conclusion**: Model converges by epoch 3. Beyond this, validation accuracy plateaus or decreases (overfitting). Early stopping at patience=5 prevents further overfitting.

---

## Image Size: 224×224

### Decision
Use **224×224** as standard input size (ImageNet convention).

### Trade-offs

| Size | Params | Memory | Train Time | Accuracy |
|------|--------|--------|------------|----------|
| 112×112 | 2.3M | 280MB | 32s | 0.834 |
| 160×160 | 2.4M | 340MB | 38s | 0.867 |
| **224×224** | **2.5M** | **420MB** | **45s** | **0.889** |
| 320×320 | 2.6M | 620MB | 72s | 0.894 |

**Conclusion**: 224×224 is standard for ImageNet models, provides good accuracy, and is well-supported by pretrained weights.

---

## Why Not GPU?

### Decision
**CPU-only** training and inference for Milestone 2.

### Rationale

**Grader/Reviewer Considerations:**
- ✅ No CUDA/GPU drivers required
- ✅ Works on any laptop (Mac, Linux, Windows)
- ✅ Reproducible results (no GPU vendor differences)
- ✅ Simpler Docker setup (no nvidia-docker)

**Performance Impact:**
- CPU training: 3-10 minutes (acceptable for demo)
- GPU training: 30-90 seconds (unnecessary optimization at this stage)

**Future Work (Milestone 3+):**
- Add optional GPU support via `device` parameter
- Maintain CPU path as default for accessibility

---

## Data Split: 70/15/15

### Decision
**70% train, 15% validation, 15% test** split.

### Rationale

**Standard Practices:**
- 60/20/20: More test data, less training data
- **70/15/15**: Balanced approach
- 80/10/10: More training data, less validation

**For Small Datasets (500-1000 images):**
- Need sufficient training data (≥350 images)
- Need meaningful validation set (≥75 images) for early stopping
- Need representative test set (≥75 images) for unbiased evaluation

**Conclusion**: 70/15/15 provides best balance for datasets in the 500-2000 image range.

---

## Summary of Key Choices

| Decision | Choice | Main Reason |
|----------|--------|-------------|
| **Model** | MobileNetV3-Small | Fastest CPU training/inference (3x faster than alternatives) |
| **Pretrained** | ImageNet weights | Small dataset (<1000 images) benefits from transfer learning |
| **Freeze Ratio** | 70% | Best accuracy/overfitting balance |
| **Augmentation** | 5-level blur | Robustness to distance (close-up to 8+ meters) |
| **Geo Provider** | Auto (Google > ipapi) | Works out-of-box, upgradable |
| **Face Detector** | Haar Cascade | Fast (5ms), sufficient for frontal faces |
| **Learning Rate** | 0.0005 | Stable convergence in 3 epochs |
| **Batch Size** | 16 | Optimal CPU memory/speed trade-off |
| **Epochs** | 3 | Convergence point, early stopping prevents overfitting |
| **Image Size** | 224×224 | ImageNet standard, good accuracy |
| **Device** | CPU-only | Grader accessibility, reproducibility |
| **Split** | 70/15/15 | Balanced for small datasets |

---

## Future Optimizations (Out of Scope for MS2)

1. **GPU Support**: Add CUDA option for 10-20x training speedup
2. **Quantization**: INT8 quantization for 4x inference speedup (TorchScript → ONNX → TFLite)
3. **Pruning**: Remove 30-50% of weights with <1% accuracy loss
4. **Ensemble**: Combine MobileNetV3 + EfficientNet for +2% accuracy
5. **AutoAugment**: Learn optimal augmentation policy
6. **Knowledge Distillation**: Distill larger model → MobileNetV3 for best of both worlds

---

## Library & Framework Choices

### PyTorch vs TensorFlow

**Decision**: Use **PyTorch** as the primary ML framework.

**Rationale**:
- ✅ Better transfer learning support (torchvision pretrained models)
- ✅ More intuitive API for research and prototyping
- ✅ TorchScript export for production deployment
- ✅ Strong community support and documentation
- ✅ Native integration with OpenCV and PIL

**Alternatives Considered**:
- **TensorFlow/Keras**: More production-oriented but heavier dependencies
- **ONNX**: Cross-framework but adds complexity for this use case

### FastAPI vs Flask

**Decision**: Use **FastAPI** for the inference API.

**Rationale**:
- ✅ Automatic OpenAPI documentation
- ✅ Built-in async support for concurrent requests
- ✅ Type validation with Pydantic
- ✅ Better performance than Flask (3-5x faster)
- ✅ Modern Python 3.11+ features

### Docker Compose vs Kubernetes

**Decision**: Use **Docker Compose** for local orchestration, with Cloud Run for production.

**Rationale**:
- ✅ Simpler setup for reviewers/graders
- ✅ No cluster management overhead
- ✅ Sufficient for development and testing
- ✅ Easy migration to Kubernetes in future (Milestone 3+)

**When to Use Kubernetes**:
- Production at scale (>100 requests/sec)
- Multi-region deployment
- Advanced autoscaling needs

---

## Trade-offs Considered

Below is a comprehensive summary of alternatives tested or rejected during development:

| Decision Area | Chosen Solution | Alternatives Tested | Why Rejected | Trade-off Accepted |
|---------------|-----------------|---------------------|--------------|-------------------|
| **Model Architecture** | MobileNetV3-Small | ResNet18, EfficientNet-B0, ViT-Tiny | Slower inference (18-28ms vs 12ms) | -1.5% accuracy for 2x speed |
| **Transfer Learning** | 70% freeze ratio | 0%, 50%, 90% freeze | 0%: overfitting; 90%: underfitting | Slight accuracy loss for better generalization |
| **Image Augmentation** | 5-level blur | None, 3-level, 7-level | None: poor blur robustness; 7: diminishing returns | -3% clean accuracy for +20% blur robustness |
| **Face Detection** | Haar Cascade | MediaPipe, MTCNN, RetinaFace | 5-10x slower, larger dependencies | Lower accuracy on angled faces (78% vs 95%) |
| **Geolocation Provider** | Multi-provider (auto) | Google-only, ip-api-only | Vendor lock-in, no offline testing | Complexity of multiple providers |
| **Learning Rate** | 0.0005 | 0.001, 0.0001 | 0.001: unstable; 0.0001: too slow | Moderate convergence speed |
| **Batch Size** | 16 | 4, 8, 32 | 4/8: slower; 32: minimal gain | Memory usage (420MB) |
| **Epochs** | 3 with early stopping | 1, 5, 10 | 1: underfit; 5+: overfit | Quick training for CPU |
| **Image Size** | 224×224 | 112×112, 160×160, 320×320 | Smaller: -5% accuracy; Larger: 2x slower | Standard ImageNet size |
| **Device** | CPU-only | GPU (CUDA) | Requires GPU drivers, not accessible to all graders | 5-10x slower training (acceptable for demo) |
| **Data Split** | 70/15/15 | 60/20/20, 80/10/10 | 60/20/20: less training data; 80/10/10: small val set | Balanced for small datasets |
| **Framework** | PyTorch | TensorFlow, JAX | TensorFlow: heavier; JAX: less mature ecosystem | PyTorch's flexibility |
| **API Framework** | FastAPI | Flask, Django | Flask: slower; Django: overkill | FastAPI learning curve |
| **Orchestration** | Docker Compose | Kubernetes, Docker Swarm | Too complex for local dev | No auto-scaling (use Cloud Run) |
| **Blur Simulation** | Gaussian blur (σ) | Motion blur, defocus blur | Less realistic for distance simulation | Simple distance model |
| **Verification Method** | Geolocation + Lecture Hall Recognition | Blink detection, head movement | Requires MediaPipe (future work) | Sufficient for Milestone 2 |

### Key Insights from Trade-offs

1. **Speed vs Accuracy**: Consistently chose speed (MobileNetV3, Haar Cascade) over marginal accuracy gains
2. **Simplicity vs Features**: Prioritized grader accessibility (CPU-only, Docker Compose) over advanced features
3. **Robustness vs Performance**: Accepted blur augmentation overhead for real-world robustness
4. **Flexibility vs Simplicity**: Multi-provider geolocation adds complexity but prevents vendor lock-in

---

## Decision Principles

Throughout the project, we followed these principles:

1. **Grader-First**: Every technical choice considers ease of setup and reproducibility
2. **CPU Optimization**: No GPU dependencies, optimized for 8GB RAM laptops
3. **Production-Ready**: Choices support deployment (Cloud Run, TorchScript, FastAPI)
4. **Extensibility**: Architecture allows future enhancements (GPU, Kubernetes, MediaPipe)
5. **Evidence-Based**: All major decisions backed by empirical benchmarks

---

## References

1. [MobileNetV3 Paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/1905.02244) - Howard et al., 2019
2. [EfficientNet Paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/1905.11946) - Tan & Le, 2019
3. [ImageNet Pretrained Models](https://pytorch.org/vision/stable/models.html) - PyTorch Documentation
4. [Transfer Learning Guide](https://cs231n.github.io/transfer-learning/) - Stanford CS231n
5. [Haversine Formula](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Haversine_formula) - Wikipedia
6. [FastAPI Documentation](https://fastapi.tiangolo.com/) - Performance benchmarks
7. [PyTorch vs TensorFlow](https://www.assemblyai.com/blog/pytorch-vs-tensorflow-in-2023/) - Framework comparison
